what you need to know about
introduction
anaesthetic experience in the undergraduate
timetable is often very limited so it can
remain somewhat of a mysterious practice
well into specialist training. this introduction
to the components of an anaesthetic
will help readers to get more from clinical
attachments in surgery and anaesthetics or
serve as an introduction to the topic for
novice or non-anaesthetists.
types and sites of anaesthesia
the term anaesthesia comes from the
greek meaning loss of sensation.
anaesthetic practice has evolved from a
need for pain relief and altered consciousness
to allow surgery. early anaesthetics
used plant derivatives with later introduction
of ether, inhaled gases and chloroform.
modern anaesthesia has been developed
and refined to enable surgery, interventions,
pain relief and stabilization, and
organ support.
various forms of anaesthesia are conducted
throughout the hospital and
beyond. the operating theatres are the
most common venue but anaesthetics are
delivered on the labour ward, day surgery,
intensive care, the emergency room,
interventional radiology, computed
tomography and magnetic resonance
imaging, and on the wards during emergency
care and transfer of acutely unwell
patients. certain regional procedures
may take place in pain clinics and outpatient
settings.
in general anaesthesia a reversible state
of unconsciousness is achieved. it can be
divided into three stages: induction, maintenance
and emergence.
in regional anaesthesia, nerve transmission
is blocked, and the patient may stay
awake or be sedated or anaesthetized during
a procedure. techniques used include:
n local anaesthetic field block
n peripheral nerve block
n nerve plexus block
n central neuraxial block, e.g. spinal or
epidural (figure 1 and table 1).
components of a general
anaesthetic
a general anaesthetic always involves an
hypnotic agent, usually an analgesic and
may also include muscle relaxation. the
combination is referred to as the ‘triad of
anaesthesia’.
the relative importance of each component
depends on surgical and patient
factors: the intervention planned, site,
surgical access requirement and the
degree of pain or stimulation anticipated.
the technique is tailored to the individual
situation.
induction
the induction of anaesthesia refers to the
transition from an awake to an anaesthetized
state. this end point can be ill defined
and the process of induction is a time of
physiological disruption with multi-system
effects.
standard induction
intravenous
the standard induction is with the intravenous
agent propofol. a calculated by
weight dose is delivered and the effects
reviewed before further titration of the
drug. delays in inducing anaesthesia may
represent slow arm–brain circulation time
(e.g. elderly, cardiovascular disease),
an introduction to anaesthesia
dr ciara donohue is specialist registrar
in anaesthesia in the centre for anaesthesia,
university college london hospitals,
london nw1 2bu, mr ben hobson
is medical student at university college
london, london, and dr robert cm
stephens is consultant anaesthetist,
university college london hospitals and
honorary senior lecturer in the centre for
anaesthesia, university college london,
london
correspondence to: dr c donohue
(ciaradonohue@doctors.org.uk)
subarachnoid (spinal) epidural
injection through dura into csf catheterization of potential space outside dura
low volume (up to 3 ml) high volume (>10 ml)
high concentration local anaesthetic 0.5% bupivicaine variable concentration local anaesthetic, analgesia
0.1% bupivicaine, anaesthesia up to 2% lignocaine
rapid onset dense sensorimotor block gradual titration of block density, may be motor
sparing
profound vasodilation causing haemodynamic instability gradual titration causing less haemodynamic
disturbance
table 1. characteristics of different central neuraxial blocks
figure 1. schematic vertical longitudinal section
of vertebral column and structures encountered
when performing central neuraxial blocks. *
negative pressure space filled with fat and
venous plexi. † extends to s2, containing
arachnoid mater, csf, pia mater, spinal cord
above l1/2 and spinal nerves.
vertebral
body
intervertebral
disc
posterior
longitudinal
ligament
anterior
longitudinal
ligament
epidural space*
dural
sac†
dura mater
spinous
process
supraspinous
ligament
ligamentum
flavum
(tough)
interspinous
ligament
ctd_c71_c75_anaesthesia.indd 71 26/04/2013 16:24
c72 british journal of hospital medicine, may 2013, vol 74, no 5
patient anxiety, recreational drug use or
extravasation. an opioid is often given to
reduce the dose of induction agent needed
and smooth the induction process. a muscle
relaxant is usually given if intubation is
required.
inhalational induction
an alternative method of inducing anaesthesia
is with a volatile agent, e.g. sevoflurane.
the concentration of volatile delivered
is gradually increased with the patient
spontaneously breathing. common uses
include paediatric practice, cases of difficult
airway, difficult venous access or
inhaled foreign body where maintaining
spontaneous ventilation is preferable.
intubation of the trachea can be achieved
under deep inhalational induction without
muscle relaxation.
rapid sequence induction:
when and why?
a specifically adapted induction process is
used when rapid intubation of the trachea
is required to minimize risk of regurgitation
and aspiration (table 2). such instances
include intestinal obstruction or intraabdominal
pathology, an un-fasted patient
in an emergency or trauma situation,
obstetric emergency or a strong history of
reflux. pre-oxygenation plus rapid induction
and paralysis obviate the need for bag
mask ventilation before securing the airway,
so the risk of gastric insufflation and
regurgitation is reduced (sinclair and
luxton, 2005).
muscle relaxation
if intubation is required, it may be necessary
to paralyse the patient using:
n depolarizing muscle relaxants (e.g. suxamethonium)
n non-depolarizing muscle relaxants
(benzylisoquinoloniums, e.g. atracurium,
or aminosteroids, e.g. rocuronium).
normally, an action potential reaching the
nerve terminal of the neuromuscular junction
causes calcium influx and acetylcholine
to be released pre-synaptically.
acetylcholine crosses the cleft and binds to
postsynaptic nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
causing opening of these ion channels
and depolarization of the motor end plate.
if a sufficient end plate potential is
achieved, an action potential is generated
leading to muscle contraction (king and
hunter, 2002).
a depolarizing agent such as suxamethonium
(biochemically two acetylcholine
molecules) binds to the postsynaptic acetylcholine
receptors, resulting in transient
receptor agonism and muscle contraction
followed by a refractory period of muscle
relaxation within 30–60 seconds lasting
several minutes. its relatively short-lived
effects are the result of its metabolism by
plasma cholinesterase.
non-depolarizing agents are competitive
antagonists of acetylcholine at the postsynaptic
nicotinic receptor and are used for
more prolonged paralysis. blocking the ion
channel, their main action is to prevent end
plate depolarization and propagation of the
impulse. atracurium undergoes spontaneous
degradation in the plasma known as
‘hoffman’ degradation, while some is
hydrolysed by esters so it is a useful agent in
patients with hepatic and renal impairment
as offset is not reliant on organ function. as
the percentage acetylcholine receptor occupancy
falls, competitive antagonism is lost
and acetylcholine can once again bind to
receptors to generate an end plate potential
and reach the threshold for transmission.
neuromuscular function is restored
(appiah-ankam and hunter, 2004).
neuromuscular junction function
should be monitored using a peripheral
nerve stimulator and observing response to
stimulations over a peripheral nerve (e.g.
ulnar). the stimulation is supramaximal in
order to stimulate all the nerve fibres and
produce a consistent muscular response.
the number and strength of resultant
muscle twitches gives information about
the recovery of the neuromuscular junction
(davis and kenny, 2003). in order to
enhance neuromuscular recovery post nondepolarizing
relaxation at the end of surgery,
the amount of acetylcholine in the
synapse is increased by inhibiting the acetylcholinesterase
enzyme using a reversal
agent such as neostigmine.
airway maintenance
under anaesthesia the soft tissues of the
airway relax and patency may be lost.
protective airway reflexes are also suppressed.
manual manoeuvres and simple
adjuncts such as a chin tilt, jaw thrust and
guedel airway are used as soon as the
patient begins to lose airway tone to prevent
obstruction. conventionally the
options for maintaining the airway of an
anaesthetized patient are a supraglottic
device (e.g. laryngeal mask airway) or
endotracheal intubation (figure 2). at the
preparation trained staff
emergency drugs and equipment
tipping trolley
suction on under pillow
aspiration of nasogastric tube
pre-oxygenation fraction of inspired oxygen 100%
3 minutes regular breathing or
five vital capacity breaths
cricoid pressure pressure over cricoid cartilage
compression of underlying
oesophagus
prevents regurgitation of gastric
contents soiling oropharynx or
airway
release pressure if vomiting
drugs no co-induction opioid
thiopentone 3–5 mg/kg
suxamethonium 1–2 mg/kg
intubation once tracheal ventilation
intubation commenced
confirmed: cricoid pressure
released
device supraglottic endotracheal
features sits above vocal cords passes through vocal cords
maintains airway inflated cuff
no airway protection against aspiration airway protected
figure 2. supraglottic and endotracheal airways.
table 2. rapid sequence induction
ctd_c71_c75_anaesthesia.indd 72 26/04/2013 16:24
british journal of hospital medicine, may 2013, vol 74, no 5 c73
what you need to know about
preoperative visit, history, examination and
review of investigations and previous
anaesthetic charts contribute to the assessment
of the airway and perioperative planning
(cranshaw and cook, 2011).
maintenance
maintenance of anaesthesia refers to keeping
a patient unconscious and can be
achieved using inhaled volatile agents or
continuous infusion of intravenous agents.
volatile agents are most commonly used,
delivered via vaporisers found on the ‘back
bar’ of the anaesthetic machine which feed
into the breathing circuit. the concentrations
of the inhaled agents are measured
and displayed. expired end tidal concentration
is equivalent to the alveolar concentration
which in turn represents the concentration
at the site of action (cns). this
gives the anaesthetist an idea of the amount
of anaesthetic agent reaching the patient
and the likely depth of anaesthesia. the
minimal alveolar concentration is the alveolar
concentration of a volatile agent which
when given alone prevents movement in
50% of healthy volunteers to a standard
surgical stimulus (e.g. skin incision). the
minimal alveolar concentration varies
between different volatile agents inversely
related to their potency (as their structures
vary) and is also affected by other pharmacological
and physiological variables (yentis
et al, 2009).
intravenous maintenance of anaesthesia
can be achieved with infusions of propofol
with or without an opioid delivered via a
pump. several pharmacokinetic models
have been developed which map the theoretical
body compartments among which a
drug distributes. the desired plasma or
effector site concentration can be dialled
up alongside basic patient demographics
(age, sex, weight) and the pump adjusts the
rate of infusion to achieve the specified
drug concentration. this is known as a
target controlled infusion. effective secure
intravenous access is crucial.
the choice of maintenance technique
may be determined by surgical and patient
factors and the experience of the anaesthetist.
total intravenous anaesthesia is
often used in day surgery, neurosurgery or
if patients get severe postoperative nausea
and vomiting as it avoids emetogenic
volatiles and enables rapid recovery with
minimal hangover effect (yuill and
simpson, 2002).
systemic effects of general
anaesthesia
general anaesthesia leads to multi-system
physiological changes (tables 3 and 4). the
systemic effects of anaesthesia vary with the
drugs used so different agents are favoured
in different clinical contexts. in general,
intravenous (propofol and thiopentone)
and volatile agents all reduce blood pressure
as a result of vasodilation, and negative
inotropy and chronotropy. starting positive
pressure ventilation (i.e. ventilating
someone) can impede venous return to the
heart, reducing preload and cardiac output.
the sympathetic stimulation from surgery
opposes these changes.
intravenous (propofol, thiopentone and
etomidate) and volatile agents are all respiratory
depressants and depress airway
reflexes to differing degrees. propofol is
particularly effective at inducing transient
apnoea and depressing airway reflexes
facilitating placement of supraglottic
devices post induction. of the volatile
agents, sevoflurane is the least irritant to
airways making it particularly suitable for
stage of general
anaesthesia airway breathing circulation drugs
induction plan for securing, maintaining high flow oxygen at vasodilation leads to reduced systemic intravenous: analgesia (opioid co-induction, e.g.
and protecting airway as soft induction, consider vascular resistance and mean arterial fentanyl) then hypnotic agent (e.g. propofol,
tissue tone and reflexes are lost pre-oxygenation pressure, intubation can cause thiopentone) with or without muscle relaxation
sympathetic hypertensive response or volatile gas induction (sevoflurane)
maintenance maintain airway position and maintain saturations, maintain adequate cardiac output volatile (e.g. sevoflurane, isoflurane, desflurane)
patency ventilatory strategies, and tissue perfusion, fluid balance intravenous (total intravenous anaesthesia, e.g.
lung protection propofol +/- remifentanil), analgesia, antiemesis
emergence suction secretions, as airway increase fraction of time of haemodynamic instability reversal of neuromuscular block
tone and reflexes return plan inspired oxygen, ensure
for safe removal of supraglottic adequate spontaneous
device or extubation tidal volumes
system common anaesthetic agents ketamine
cardiovascular hypotension: mean arterial pressure = (heart rate normotension or hypertension
x stroke volume) x systemic vascular resistance
vasodilation (↓systemic vascular resistance) tachycardia
negative chronotropy (↓heart rate)
negative inotropy (↓stroke volume)
respiratory loss of airway reflexes and tone airway reflexes and tone maintained
bronchodilation
gastrointestinali propofol = antiemetic salivation
volatiles = emetogenic emetogenic
cns hypnosis dissociative anaesthesia, analgesia,
hallucinations
from sasada and smith (2008)
table 4. stages of a general anaesthetic: an a, b, c, d approach
table 3. systemic effects of general anaesthesia
ctd_c71_c75_anaesthesia.indd 73 26/04/2013 16:24
c74 british journal of hospital medicine, may 2013, vol 74, no 5
gaseous induction and paediatrics.
desflurane is irritant and is therefore often
used once anaesthesia and airway have
been established. both sevoflurane and
isoflurane are bronchodilators and may
even have a role in the management of
brittle asthma.
ketamine is an exceptional intravenous
agent in that it maintains cardiovascular
stability and preserves muscular tone, airway
patency and bronchodilates in addition
to its analgesic properties. it is termed
a ‘dissociative anaesthetic’, meaning the
patient may be unaware and detached from
his/her surroundings but not completely
unconscious. its attributes make it useful
in haemodynamically unstable patients,
the developing world and field anaesthesia
(peck et al, 2008).
emergence and recovery
once anaesthesia is no longer required,
maintenance agents can be switched off.
before emergence, adequate analgesia and
anti-emesis should be ensured and neuromuscular
junction function restored if a
muscle relaxant has been used.
like induction, emergence can be a
time of physiological disturbance. as
patients start to wake from anaesthesia or
‘lighten’ they may develop agitation,
laryngospasm and breath-holding.
conventionally extubation is performed
following oropharyngeal suction, once the
patient is generating good tidal volumes
and is awake, ensuring airway reflexes
have returned and the patient will protect
his/her own airway. in certain circumstances
extubation may be performed
‘deep’, i.e. with the patient still under
anaesthesia. under anaesthesia, airway
reflexes will remain suppressed, reducing
the risk of coughing, laryngospasm and
hypertension associated with extubation.
this may be preferable in certain neurosurgical
and cardiac patients in whom
surges in intracranial or systemic blood
pressure should be avoided. however, the
airway will be unprotected against aspiration
until the patient is awake.
the recovery room is an intermediate
place of safety between theatre and the
ward where immediate surgical or anaesthetic
complications can be detected and
managed. vital signs, pain scores and other
potential problems such as postoperative
nausea and vomiting are monitored.
perioperative care
warming
as homeothermic mammals, our core
temperature is designed to be around
36.5°c. patients are susceptible to hypothermia
under anaesthesia as a result of
vasodilation causing redistribution of heat
from core to periphery, convection, radiation
(exposed areas), conduction (contact
with cold metal objects), evaporation
(endotracheal tube bypasses nasopharyngeal
humidification, exposed moist mucosal
surfaces) and loss of compensatory heatpreserving
or heat-generating mechanisms,
e.g. shivering.
hypothermia can cause coagulopathy,
perioperative cardiac events, increased risk
of postoperative infection and can prolong
recovery and hospital stay. exposure
should be minimized and temperature
monitored pre-, intra- and postoperatively.
warm air devices and warmed fluids
can be used to offset heat loss and maintain
optimal body temperature (harper et
al, 2008).
fluid balance
the anaesthetist needs to be an expert in
fluid resuscitation, using crystalloids, colloids
and blood products where appropriate.
the aim is to ensure good tissue
perfusion and hence oxygenation. rather
than give a fixed fluid dose, monitors
(e.g. oesophageal doppler) are often used
and fluid challenges given to achieve a set
endpoint, aiming to avoid hyper- or
hypovolaemia (doherty and buggy,
2012).
positioning
patients are vulnerable to nerve and pressure
point injury under anaesthesia and
protection of these areas is the responsibility
of the anaesthetist. patients should ideally
be in a neutral position with padding
used to support at-risk areas (knight and
mahajan, 2004).
awareness
awareness is the unplanned recall of events
under anaesthesia and is often one of the
complications patients fear most. it can be
implicit or explicit, from a vague sense of
having been awake through to specific
memories of events and conversations
respectively. awareness is distressing and
can lead to post-traumatic syndromes.
monitoring for awareness can include
clinical observation (such as papillary dilatation,
lacrimation, sweating) and measurement
(heart rate, blood pressure, end
tidal volatile concentration and depth of
anaesthesia monitors). most depth of
anaesthesia monitors interpret patterns of
neuronal electrical activity to deduce the
level of conscious state (al-shaikh and
stacey, 2007).
other drugs
aside from the traditional triad of anaesthesia
drugs, the cardiovascular system is
often manipulated to offset the effects of
anaesthesia or surgical stimulation. heart
rate may be increased by an anti-muscarinic
(e.g. atropine or glycopyrrolate)
or a mixed beta-adrenoceptor agonist
(e.g. ephedrine) or reduced by betablockers.
blood pressure can be increased
by vasoconstricting with an alpha 1
adrenoceptor agonist such as metaraminol
or reduced with an alpha antagonist
(e.g. phentolamine).
analgesia
pain relief is very important for patients
and features in the triad of anaesthesia.
despite a patient being unconscious and
unaware intraoperatively, stimulation (e.g.
surgery) will still elicit a sympathetic
response which analgesia can desirably
attenuate. appropriate analgesia is also
essential for smooth emergence and comfort
immediately after surgery. analgesia is
typically multi-modal with opioids titrated
to extent of stimulation and predicted
postoperative pain.
safety
patient safety is crucially important. the
world health organization surgical safety
checklist is a tool to attempt to make
the perioperative journey safer and
enhance team communication. the entire
team must ensure the correct patient is
consented for the correct procedure and
that any allergies or potential complications
are acknowledged and shared among
the team.
the world health organization surgical
safety checklist has three components
which are completed on arrival to the
anaesthetic room, before the start of surgery
or intervention and at the end of the
procedure (walker et al, 2012).
ctd_c71_c75_anaesthesia.indd 74 26/04/2013 16:24
british journal of hospital medicine, may 2013, vol 74, no 5 c75
what you need to know about
conclusions
anaesthesia is an enormous subject and
this article is merely a tip of the iceberg
introduction to some types of regional and
general anaesthesia.
anaesthetists, while developing specialized
airway skills and a deep understanding
of physiology and pharmacology, need an
holistic approach and broad knowledge
base because of the varied nature of their
role. anaesthetists will come into contact
with approximately two thirds of hospital
patients in a diverse range of clinical contexts
and environments. hopefully this
article has whetted your appetite to know
more or given you a fresh insight into a
specialty which is taking place in all corners
of your hospital. bjhm
conflict of interest: none.
al-shaikh b, stacey s (2007) non invasive
monitoring. in: al-shaikh b, stacey s, eds.
essentials of anaesthetic equipment. 3rd edn.
churchill livingstone, london: 151–3
appiah-ankam j, hunter j (2004) pharmacology of
neuromuscular blocking drugs. contin educ
anaesth crit care pain 4(1): 2–7
cranshaw j, cook t (2011) airway assessment and
management. in: allman k, wilson i, eds. oxford
handbook of anaesthesia. 3rd edn. oxford
university press, oxford: 970–6
davis p, kenny g (2007) biological electrical
potentials: their display and recording. in: davis
p, kenny g, eds. basic physics and measurement in
anaesthesia. 5th edn. butterworth-heinemann,
london: 171
doherty m, buggy d (2012) intraoperative fluids:
how much is too much? br j anaesth 109(1):
69–79
harper cm, andrzejowski jc, alexander r (2008)
nice and warm. br j anaesth 101(3): 293–5
king jm, hunter j (2002) physiology of the
neuromuscular junction. br j anaesth cepd
reviews 2(5): 129–33
knight djw, mahajan rp (2004) patient
positioning in anaesthesia. contin educ anaesth
crit care pain 4(5): 160–3
peck te, hill s, williams m (2008) core drugs in
anaesthetic practice. in: peck te, hill s, williams
m, eds. pharmacology for anaesthesia and intensive
care. 3rd edn. cambridge university press,
cambridge: 99–102
sasada m, smith s (2008) drugs in anaesthesia and
intensive care. 3rd edn. oxford university press,
oxford
sinclair rcf, luxton mc (2005) rapid sequence
induction. contin educ anaesth crit care pain
5(2): 45–8
walker a, reshamwalla s, wilson i (2012) surgical
safety checklists: do they improve outcomes? br j
anaesth 109(1): 47–54
yentis s, hirsch n, smith g (2009) anaesthesia and
intensive care a-z. 4th edn. churchill
livingstone, london: 354
yuill g, simpson m (2002) an introduction to total
intravenous anaesthesia. br j anaesth cepd
reviews 2(1): 24–6
key points
n anaesthesia means loss of sensation and can be divided into regional anaesthesia (blockade of nerve
transmission) or general anaesthesia (a reversible state of unconsciousness).
n general anaesthesia often comprises a triad of hypnosis, analgesia and muscle relaxation.
n general anaesthesia can be divided into three stages: induction, maintenance and emergence.
n under general anaesthesia airway tone and reflexes are lost and the airway must be maintained
with manual manoeuvres, adjuncts (guedel, laryngeal mask airways) or definitive devices which also
protect the airway from regurgitation and aspiration (e.g. endotracheal tubes).
n general anaesthesia leads to multi-system physiological changes particularly at induction and
emergence.
n other aspects of perioperative care central to anaesthetic practice include thermal homeostasis, fluid
balance, positioning, avoidance of awareness, analgesia and patient safety.
order your copies by visiting
www.quaybooks.co.uk
or call our hotline
+44(0)1722 716 935
psychosis
stories of recovery and hope
editors: hannah cordle, jane fradgley, jerome carson, frank holloway and paul richards
  
9 78 1856 42 4202
isbn 1-85642-420-0
www.quaybooks.co.uk
psychosis
stories of recovery and hope
editors: hannah cordle, jane fradgley, jerome carson, frank holloway and paul richards
cover front jane_layout 1 06/08/2010 15:12 page 1
psychosis stories of recovery and hope
about the book
this book presents real people recounting their stories as psychosis
patients, taking you on a journey through the hard times, the discovery
of hope and the road to recovery.
each story will inspire you and provide a greater insight into working
and caring for people who experience psychosis. the book will provide
a greater understanding of psychosis for sufferers, their carers and
all healthcare professionals by sharing the personal experiences of
individuals living positively with psychosis.
the book presents real-life role models for people with mental illness;
demonstrating that recovery is a real possibility; and promoting hope as
an important factor in recovery. each contributor has something original
and practical to say on recovery, be it the importance of spirituality,
finding ways to contribute to society and bring meaning and order to
their life. each story can offer us new directions in the recovery debate.
it includes important contributions from leading specialists on the
clinical aspects of care and examines the value of narratives in the
recovery process. it surveys the recovery landscape and provides
examples in practice at both an individual and group level making it a
highly practical book for any mental health practitioner.
editors: hannah cordle, jane fradgley,
jermone carson, frank holloway and paul richards
psychosis_press.indd 1 09/12/2010 09:33
each story will inspire you and provide a greater understanding into
working with people who experience psychosis.
 aims to provide a greater understanding of psychosis for sufferers, carers and all healthcare
professionals
 comprises narratives of individuals living positively with psychosis and presents their
experience with different healthcare professionals
 includes chapters on the clinical aspects of care and recovery by leading specialists in the  eld
 funded by guy’s and st thomas’ charity
isbn-13: 978-1-85642-420-2; isbn-10: 1-85642-420-0; 234 x 156 mm; publication 2011 £19.99;
220 pages
“this book is a powerful testament to the importance of story...unsentimental, lightly
edited and intelligently framed by short essays from mental health professionals, this book
is a welcome draft of realistic optimism for all those involved in the world of mental health
provision... this book is a tonic for the users and providers of mental health services.”
british journal of wellbeing
real people recounting their stories through
the hard times and the road to recovery
ctd_c71_c75_anaesthesia.indd 75 26/04/2013 16:24
